28.12.2025: First tough design choice: Its about how to represent the game board; It can either be represented as a simple graph consisting of a feature matrix and an adjecancy matrix, where the adjacency matrix will be very boring, because it just indicates next neighbor edges. With this, I can then use the power of MPNN to handle the observation task.

On the other hand, due to the simplicity of the board, I could also use a simple tensor-notation and have CNNs handle the observation task. CNNs can be accelerated with GPUs, but I think MPNNs can too (in fact, they are quite similar). 

Today, i think, I will go with the graph structure, because I think, it captures the idea of findind a "path" through the board for strategy. However, for dense convolutions there is also the explicit bias of locality and therefore, both are suspected to work. But GNNs are a little bit more modern and if need be, one could also change the adjecancy matrix in the future, while this is not possible in the tensor notation. Graphs are in this sense a little bit more modern. 


--> Focus on the observation space first!!! board.py initialize and create_graph, use also player.py, units.py


29.12.2025: Designed tile.py for Tile class to be used for the board list. However, should it just be a list? Or some better structure?

The problem with observation: Say, there are 3 players in the map, then we have the following observation unit featurization for a tile considering only warrior yes/no:

all players view: (player 1 has warr on tile)

P1: 0 1 0 0 0 0
P2: 0 0 0 0 0 0		stack: 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
P3: 0 0 0 0 0 0


all players view: (player 2 has warr on tile)

P1: 0 0 0 0 0 0
P2: 0 1 0 0 0 0		stack: 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
P3: 0 0 0 0 0 0



These two vectors are different, yet, when training RL agents from perspective P1 and perspective P2, they should actually be the same, because they describe the same state; both P1 and P2 have a warr on the tile from their perspective, yet the total observation vector is (thruthfully) different. However, in order to use the same agents to train against each other, the respective views vector must be changed to reflect the SAME state. Both should be 

			stack: 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

We therefore need to reorder the dimensions in the partial graph representations in the player class;

P1 view: P1 P2 P3 ...
P2 view: P2 P1 P3 ...
P3 view: P3 P1 P2 ...

This will signify: First dimensions: MY UNITS, later dimensions: Enemy/ Friend units





30.12.: Problem with Village and City; Village has no playerId but city has and this can make code cluttery; with some if == None statements, which are not clean. So, instead, the city class will inherit from the village class. But the city featurizer in tile.py works already pretty well and should be taken for the other featurizers too.
--> This turned out to be worst, because capturing a village would create a new city object and having all of these functions in an existing object is better 

22:50 Uhr: The board is now finished and can easily be transformed into the graph via create_graph_from_board_state() function call. 

Next, I will probably have to program player.py and game.py and distribute functions like unit movement etc. based on the followin criteria:

1) The interface needs to be perfectly prepared to create the action masks and translate smoothly into the environment wrapper.
2) For this, it is important to define one instance (player/ unit/ board) that makes DECISIONS in the game, while the other instances should just be responsive to decisions. 
3) Player will include the notion of the partial graph (fog, switch PX to position P1 in local node feats), which is created from the global graph. All (current) actions will manifest in a change in the global graph, and after every single decision, the new global and partial graphs need to be created!

Good luck and god speed




14.01.2026: Some prep be4 coding

player.py will be a wrapper for everything visible to the player with playerId: partial graph, list of units, list of own cities, stars per turn, stars, etc.

--> It is NOT making any board changes; this will be happening in game.py

----------------------
game.py: Includes game mechanics, such as "can_spawn_unit(player, unit, city)" and "move_unit(player, unit)"
	- Include "interactive" flag in the class constructor to enable a mode, where you play the game
	- (Not only) For interactive mode, he solves things by introducing "validate_action" and "apply_action" functions in the game class to have you play the game
	- "apply_action(player, action)" applies every possible action. It has if statements for all 13 possible action types and iterates through IntEnum "ActionTypes".
		--> This will work together with "translated_action" in env.py. It is used to have the RL algorithm choose an action and let game.py process it using only one function. The alternative would be calling a lot of different functions, where only one logic is handled. Its prob best to go with his idea. 
	- game class instantiates the players in the constructor
	- all board modifications are defined here!



----------------------
env.py: Here, the action masks are build and other RL stuff... I dont know exactly yet


----------------------
First things first: In comparison to the catan 13 basic actions that the mother action head chooses from, what will be the ausgangssituation in this game?
--> 1. Move unit (also which order???)
	2. Attack with unit (composite action? move and attack? not make composite?)
	3. create new unit (composite action: decide action -> decide city -> decide unit)
	4. research tech (decide research -> which tech)
	5. interact with tile; harvest resource, chop forest, build forge, etc. (decide tile interaction -> decide tile -> decide action)
	6. 

14.01., 2:08 Uhr. The above list is WORK IN PROGRESS and not yet final. Make decisions on what actions should be composite and how fine detailed!!!

Next: player.py holding all relevant player information
Then: game.py handling basic game mechanics
Then then: "validate_action" and "apply_action" to work towards env



22:51 Uhr: node features:
0 1 2	3  4        5 6 7 8 9	0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
1 0 0	0  1		0 0 0 0 0 	0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
		P1 P2		v P1-P2--	P1----------P2----------
field	player		city 		W-----R-----W-----R-----
type	control		feats		i r p i r p i r p i r p
								Units

idle ready process



15.01.: partial_graph for 2player games can now be constructed via player.py "construct_partial_graph_2players"

Next: Where are the units for the player stored to iterate over? How can the order be reimagined every step? 
How does it work with the mother action head?

Begin from the end: When a unit moves and applies vision, this must modify the player.uncovered_tiles_ids, but player does not modify the board.
Therefore, the modification must happen in game.py  <---> it would be best to start game.py on account of unit movement and vision application,
bc. this brings everything together: 
	agent decides unit move (&player instance has unit) --> game.py "apply action"  --> unit.move (given partial graph) --> board changes, player uncovered tiles change


15.01. 9:53 Uhr:

Move unit as composite action:
-> Select MoveUnit action in mother selection head
	-> Another mask is applied over all possible units under players control marked with either r or p (where additional statements for p are required)
	How to handle mask of variable length?
	---> Can be solved by treating the list of units as variable input length sequence and working with cross attention module
	unit.tile is linking the unit to the graph. This will help for context-information.
		-> Move validation: First get all possible destination tiles. Then calculate paths to all possible destination tiles. If path not possible, mask False.
		Return only options that are True. Context could be provided by creating the partial graph for every possible move (MAKING IT EXPLICIT)
		Happens in game.py
			-> Make move: unit.move and unit.apply_vision are used to complete the action. 


In general, there is a lot of cross-referencing going on rn: The tile holds a unit class, which is also referencing to the tile its standing on.
Then player has a list of units pointers, pointing to his units under control. 
If I understand correctly, these cross references are just pointers and no object is saved to memory twice unless deepcopy is used. 
This is good from a memory management point, but be carefull to only have ONE way to modify the class instances;
for example, dont have functions in player.py that modify the board.

Next TODO: code all the necessary game logic for unit movement and interaction using the apply_action function in game.py


16.01.:
- Using networkx for path finding algorithms.
- Included self.movement_topology_graph for the graph topology for movement. However, it is recommended (by AI) to have the partial graph stay 
as numpy arrays, because this would be faster compared to having partial graphs be a nx.graph and modifying, because of metadata overhang
- "calc_movement_target_and_shortest_path" in game.py calculates the target locations aswell as the shortest path to it, excluding invalid paths and therefore invalid target locations
- Had to change the feature dimension to include escaping for units with escape:



0 1 2	3  4        5 6 7 8 9	0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5
1 0 0	0  1		0 0 0 0 0 	0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
		P1 P2		v P1--P2--	P1--------------P2-------------
field	player		city 		W-------R-------W-------R------
type	control		feats		i r e h i r e h i r e h i r e h
								Units



idle ready escape can_hit


17.01., 2:45 Uhr:

The first apply_action works now, wohoo. Next steps are:
- implement attack logic and apply action
- implement seiging logic and apply action
- implement unit creation apply action 
- implement end turn apply action

Then, we can go to env and finally work towards the first agent :DDD





25.01.

Include city holding unit pointer also into game.py move_unit() and into the apply_action() and into board.py initialize() at the very bottom
Basically, we always have to check, if there is a city on the tile and then attach the unit pointer to the city the same way as we attach it to
the tile. This is a bit cumbersome, but so far, the situation are quite limited. NEED BETTER SOLUTION IN THE FUTURE!

--> It would be better to have City(Object) inherit from Tile and have just the additional self variables and functions!



25.01. 23:41 Uhr:

Only the seiging mechanic is missing, then everything in the base game can be managed with actions. However, now, the action masks need to be coded.

For example; 	action type = move --> which unit? which location?
				action type = attack --> which unit? attack which enemy unit (as id)?	These masks include some logic for example attack range

For things like these, i need a way to connect a local graph with the id of the unit/ city/ opponent unit. Otherwise the agent wont connect 
the unit id with the actual position of the unit.
	I have to really think about this one. One idea could be a positional embedding like a periodic 
	function over the grid to give the agent a notion of geometric proximity. 


IMPORTANT: Since the game mechanism are now coded in .py files, it is now time to switch to a jupyter notebook to readily try the env functions
while they are coded. Create jupyter notebooks, import all necessary classes and then create the objects and run a random game.

Let the visualization be done completely with AI, dont spend notable time on this yet!!!

Good luck!




04.02.2026:

Added jupyter notebook environment to work towards env wrapper. In the file "first_game_tests" everything runs now. For this, some minor changes had to be done to the folder structure to more mimic the python package structure: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/20552338/handling-complicated-directory-structure-with-python-imports

Now, lets see, if it is possible to play a random game only using the move masks and selecting randomly and have a little stoopid visualization coded up by free AI agents to follow along...


05.02. 23.19 Uhr:

I can run random games now and have a simple visualization of the game board. However, there are still bugs;

1. It appears, in some cases of unit deletion, they still stay on the board graph; I can have more units on the board tiles, while the number on units_under_control never goes beyond the allowed maximum. I suspect that in some kind of interaction, a unit is not properly deleted from a tile object.

2. Maybe caused by 1., in some cases, when a unit can_hit, because it senses an enemy unit on a neighboring tile (because this uses all tiles on board), there is no unit in opponent.units_under_control which causes the action mask to be empty and crashed the random game. 

---> The problem lies in the attacking mechanism; it appears that the attacker, when reducing the hp of the defender to 0 does not take its place, but rather stays in his original place. Then he somehow doubles...


Here is what was missing: 
1. Unit.tile was not updated in attacking action
2. Apply vision was missing in attacking action
3. when there are two units that can_hit, but one unit deletes the defender, then there will be a unit left that can hit but has no target. I included it into the action mask
4. Because of the return statements in the attack action, the board graph was not updated, which led to problems in the rendering. 
5. If unit did not have a single valid move location, it was not checked and movement was still a valid action for this unit.
6. 


06.02.2026

Can now run random games. Only need to implement the seige city mechanic to make caputing villaged and seiging cities possible. Then, we can code up the env wrapper but read the blog first to make sure to understand what comes next!

Good luck!!


07.02.2026:

How to incorporate seiging cities in the current codebase?

-> The idea: A unit can capture a city, if it is a) from the opponent player and b) in state ready. This way, the city doesnt need a history of units. 
For building the mask: Look at every unit in the ready state; check their tiles; check if there is village/ city of opponent player_id; enable capturing

The following problems occurr at this point in time:

1. Unit can capture city while being in state idle
2. Instead of becoming a city, village just dissapears...

--> Needs fixing!


08.02.2026:

1. Simply was forgotten... now worked into city_bool
2. because city.lvl was not updated from being a city

The base game is now finished in its first form.

The next steps are:

1. Read the blog to make sure to understand the following steps
    a) Including how to use the functions of action mask to implement into the env wrapper class
    b) How the actuall interface looks to the neural networks; are they different in the case for dynamic lengths?
    c) Where do I need to implement the location embedding in order to make it most effectively?
2. Fix one last problem: Riders in escape can currently move to an occupied tile; this should not be
3. Set up a github for the project. Use version control and branching for any additions!



10.02.2026:

The next steps:

1. Build the env wrapper and understand where the interface between the action mask and the model output is
	--> I think it just provides it and then RL adds logits to it
2. Find the actual interface. This is more important than the model for now. It will probably be found in game_manager.
3. 




15.02.2026:

Ive started a claude ai project in hopes to increase the speed of implementing the skeletal structure but atm it cant read subfolders of github for some reason...

wrapper.py is programmed in its base form. The template was analyzed by claude ai with the following results:

1) Good RL practice is to follow the gymnasium template: env has 
    a) reset() to start a new episode
    b) step() that returns the RL tuple obs, reward, done, info
    c) render() that shows the game state in the environment

2) get_action_mask dictates the set of possible actions and can be translated into actions together with a policy networks logits

3) _get_obs() is the function that all the necessary observations from the game state to the network. All network (training) things are done in the RL folder structure.
Next to the partial_graph, this includes the opponent score, the list of your units and cities to fix the length of the networks output, etc. 

4) Because the rewards and wether or not the game is done depends on the game, it is also handled here. The rewards are fixed values and do not depend on the network and are therefore handed over as simple float values. done simply adds a lot of points to the winner.

5) step() translates and combines the action and returns the observation after the action to be used to gradient descent


Need to include code for _get_obs and _get_done_and_reward; choose something arbitrary for now. 

Next, test if the environment works with a random policy network (construct a torch network that returns random logits based on the correct length)

Next next, deal with the actual implementation of PPO...


Good luck with that!



21.02.2026:

EnvWrapper now works as intended, utilizing reset(), step() and get_action_mask() (and render()) to provide the full environment for the RL training.

22.02., 02:25 Uhr:

dense rewards are now also included. Claude ai has built a full REINFORCE training pipeline with a policy ACTOR network that has random embeddings (does not take any kind of observation into account). Following on that chat, it should be able with the new environment to build a full PPO training pipeline including the batching and minibatch stuff. Maybe already some parallelization of processes to test the RAM. 

As soon as this is working, all thats left is to build an actuall good way to implement the observation and build the dynamic logit arrays with attention mechanisms and positional encoding. Ideally, youll find some super optimized way to precombine the action mask with the possible observations right into the architecture.
But at first, its probably better to go with a simple baseline model. The simplest one would probably be a graph level representation as a bottleneck vector for the partial graph and then make the selection heads do some form of pairwise node-level attention scoring. For this, maybe find a embedding dim for the node features and then use the action mask to only calculate the pairwise attention with the relevant nodes. This can probably be achieved with claude ai code aswell.

Then, you should be able to let it run for the first time, fully unoptimized, w.o. MCTS (Monte Carlo Tree Search) and without using the strong GPU of yours. 

We will improve from there! God speed!


09:01 Uhr:




23.02.2026:

I have tested the first trained policy now. It appears to go into the right direction. However, as was expected, it learns to play the bugs in the current code. 
Specifically, riders can enter the escape state, even if they have not hit any enemy. Additionally, when they are in the escape state, they are able to move to occupied tiles. 
-> Solved units turn state; they were more involved than I initially thought
-> For the other one, it appears the error lies in the sloppy solution in game.calc_movement_target_and_shortest_path:

try:
    nodes_to_remove.remove(unit_location_node)
except:
    pass

Removing the try and except block poses a problem for riders in the escape turn_state. 

IT TURNS OUT, in the tile featurizer function for unit featurization:

all_unit_state_vecs[unit.unit_type][unit.turn_state] = unit.current_hp / unit.hp

BOTH current_hp and hp are ints and therefore, 9/10, 8/10, ... gets rounded DOWN TO 0!! We need to specify, that this needs to be a floating point value:

all_unit_state_vecs[unit.unit_type][unit.turn_state] = float(unit.current_hp / unit.hp)

...Absolute classic, you couldve searched forever in the movement functions. Also, its not really a surprise that the Policy was not able to learn attacking stategies, given that I wasnt even able to detect enemy units with low health (or its own unit for that sake). 



24.02., 01:15 Uhr:

The current BL (base line) policy network (BLpolicy.py) hardcodes the 10x10 boardsize graph with the position embedding and the edges indices of the Moores graph (all connected including diagonals).
This is not good and needs to be fixed to take in arbitrary game board sizes. It is also a good idea to randomly choose the board size between [6, 16] or smthing. Just go with the polytopia defaults from tiny up to massive i guess. This way, the policy learns both immediate confrontation and long exploration. 

However, at the current state, updates just take to long. There appears to be a fundamental problem with the code utilizing the GPU and claude didnt fix it (although it still worked). Chances are, I need to work myself into this and read similar projects or use one of the recommended PPO implementation that the guy used. 
The PPO update takes like 30+mins while the rest is a matter of seconds (rollout is about a minute). If I need to run multiple thousands of updates, I need to have some kind of significant speedup!

Therefore, the next steps are:

1) Fix the BL architecture to not be limited to a 10x10 board_size
2) Understand the PPO training loop to make better prompts and theoretize, what can be done on the GPU
3) Improve the GPU utilization by putting all on the GPU and processing the whole batch with all observations in parallel. 

We need to achieve a time of around 1-3 mins for every update; 1000 Updates ~ 16.66h-3d 




06.03. Speed up tiem HOOORAYY

Have read myself into the basics of PPO and disected the current state of processing in the actor network. 


07.03. 13:37 Uhr

Hardcore weekend before me, because i can couple the RL project to my interview about a phd position to combine PPO with molecular drug discovery in oslo.

A lot has changed: Speedup was achieved by:

1. Processing the MPNN as a batch for all graphs
2. Reducing the number of steps for an episode and the number of processes and envs, also having less minibatches to process more in parallel;
this is not ideal, but it is more important to run alot of updates. In the fine-tuning setting, it will be reasonable to make eveything more fine structured.

I think the GPU will only really be utilized, once the decision heads actually do more GPU heavy computation for example with graph transformer architectures.


Other changes:

The first trained network which used soft masks by using clamp(min=1e-8) didnt work, because it started to sample invalid action which crashed the game.
I had to make the mask hard, to softmax(-inf)=0 exactly.

I made it such that the envs now randomly create a board shape in between (10,16). This should be increased to (8,30) at some point, but right now, this is fine.


08.03. 20:49 Uhr

Yesterday, I philosophised a lot about my actor architecture. It now exists in a vague conceptual state and can be fleshed out in a basic form 
using claudes coding skills and my skill to copy and paste it into my project. 


09.03. 20:47 Uhr

Hello

Ok, the new architecture is quite a stretch, but its slowly coming together (00:08 Uhr)



10.03.

Now, almost all heads have been coded into their respecive [HEAD_NAME]_module.py and all similar ones are collected in utility_modules.py

At some points, also the middle heads may be collected as one big head, that distinguishes in the forward pass via action type, but this comes
when all trajectories are collected.

Only the capture city head is missing.

Then, upload all the files to claude and prompt it to code one big policy model that will initialize all submodules and handles the I/O and also includes the 
ppo evaluate_actions pass; this will probably be kind of tricky, but claude has all the information, so we trust him to make a good job there; we will
have to optimize anyway I suppose.

When this model is done, run a couple of random games with this new architecture to see, if it works.
Also look at the size of the model to have a good starting base-line variant.

Finally, prompt claude to build a new ppo pipeline. At first, we may choose to still have the soft endings after a turn to have it in one file.

But later, it is important to build own files for the game_handler, PPO with different streams and so on to really get things going. 


Do this step by step and dont forget; Pre-optimization is the root of all evil!!! And run some ppo updates so you dont get bored with no visible progess...


19:40 Uhr: During a walk, it came to my mind that it would probably be a good idea to start a list of things that the AI created in code, which I still have to check, so that these things dont fall under the table. 

Ill start the list with:

1. Complicated padding logic, specifically, choosing reflective padding at map borders instead of 0 padding. 
2. The way it calculates the probabilities of the full trajectories. We have to prove mathematically, that its correct or find a better way to include the entropy in a mathematical way.
3. 



11.03. 16:58 Uhr

So I have prompted for a fix of the memory leaks, but I am now expecting that the agents just learn to create more and more units and that 
blows up the number of possible trajectories and that is why the update time increases. We have to check if this eventually leads to 
memory overflows, but memory leaks beyond updates are now out of the question (--> I monitored the GPU VRAM)

One persisting problem keeps on being the bad critic performance. I did not see any kind of consistency or logic in the value estimate
and therefore, I assume this also hinders the policy from producing a good looking loss curve and with that improving behaviour.

I therefore think it will now be necessary to build a PPO pipeline with the two strands of GAEs for each player that beyond the soft endings
and rather goes over the entire episode. Maybe then, GAE calculation wont also be done in like 0.001s and that could be the main hindrance. 

But I need to make sure to git commit be4 I do that and also, it would actually be interesting to look what the agent is able to learn in this 
setting. However, as of right now, I still take like 30 mins for a single update and if there are 100s of updates necessary to improve, I 
cant hope to get anywhere with my system. I still need to find a way to increase the speed of PPO, even if that means less quality in
the updates. For how efficiently fast I simulate environments, I defo need to balance this with the PPO time, for example, by cutting away the 
first 50 decisions or so (based on some criteria, because otherwise I will greatly bias the value estimate). 

Be4 that tho, build a dope ass rendering that shows the probabilities of the possible trajectories for every state. That would be quite
nice.
---> I need to start collecting screenshots then for the post later.
---> DONE

The screenshots and descriptions thereof are stored here: 



12.03. 13:10Uhr

Prompting suggests that we build a second wrapper, wrapping the environment wrapper and distributing the correct two streams of MDPs of both players to be used for PPO updates. This is probably "game_manager" from henry's github.
This is also a wonderfull opening to multiplayer games, because there, the turn of the other players are handled as a "block box" or environment actions. 
It COULD be an option to introduce a small negative reward during the opponents turn for killing one of the other players unit, but this COULD be added later if they still seem to throw their units into the enemy lines for no reasons

Claude does not like the idea of subsampling 10% of the batch data randomly to be used for minibatches, so i guess I just have to try it out empirically, but I will also ask in the RL subreddit, where I actually made an account for it.

Next steps: game_manager and ask subreddit!






















15.03. 14:42 Uhr


A lot has happened in the last days. I trained to around 280 updates and the agent is improving. 
In order to follow the learning process, I have created a libreoffice word file, where there are rendered examples of games after every major learning time. 
It also includes some summaries, that would usually be here, so from here on, it is important to make a distinction where what information stands.

FOR LEARNING PROCESS OF A SPECIFIC MODEL: 
For this use the visual_examples folder and LO word files. It will be much easier to follow when looking at the actual rendering. Also, it will be kind of interesting to follow the rendering quality as it receives updates every once in a while when new features need to be observed.


FOR CODEBASE CHANGES AND PROGRESS IN THE GAMES CODE AND RL APPROACHES:
This is here. Here should be where the main design choices are laid out and the codebase is managed. Because this will be the source of the blog post one day.
From here, there should be references to the other writeup sources, so this will be the central bundler. 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Back to the current state of the project:

The base version of the game is now training and I will keep training it until around 1000 updates. This is mainly to get a feeling for how long PPO takes to learn something meaningful. 
HOWEVER, as there are currently no major choices for the agent other than explore, attack and capture, the policy naturally is limited in refined decision making. 
One thing that makes this very clear is that riders get <0.1% chance to be spawned at any point in the game. Even tho they dont "cost" more and provide much more utility than warriors... Why is that?
---> UTILITY at this point in the games implementation does not mean ANYTHING!
     Maybe, at some close encounter game, the agent made warriors and won the game and the gradient signal was so large, that riders got kicked out of being able 
     to exist for ever. There is also currently no (direct) reason for an agent to hold a city; all the agent cares about is to make as many trades as possible
     and therefore, hes happy as long as the fight keeps going on. 
     Actually, the agent SHOULD have learned that having more cities means creating more units and therefore, HOLDING a city is a plus, but maybe he also
     learned that its a good bait in order to draw in more enemy units to make kills. 



Therefore, it is now important to add the major decision to the game; balance between eco and army. 
I think this will be the point, where I can actually start to observe the emergence of strategic decision making. 

To drive this giant task of advancing the game simulation (which literally means reworking the ENTIRE codebase), I want to go on with two major checklists to be worked off. Luckily, they go somehow hand-in-hand:



    The tactics to be observed (including how)                          .       The things that need to be implemented into the game
                                                                        .       
     #################################                                  .      - include currency income based on city level (also add city levels)
     #       First big block:        #                                  .      - include unit cost
     #      balance eco and army     #                                  .      - include cost of city upgrade (NO RECOURCES YET)
     #################################                                  .  (to make our lifes easier, just estimate the average price for a city upgrade
                                                                        .   and have the agent pay that much to upgrade the city. Tech-trees and recource
     A) city upgrades (count number of each upgrade chosen)             .   harvesting are something for the future, when its actually about linking the agent
     B) Income maximizing (count avg. income value at every turn)       .   to the actual game with some screen readers or smthn)
                                                                        .      - include no income for seiged city
                                                                        .
                                                                        .
     Observe diverse tactical warfare:                                  .
                                                                        .
     A) Vet assigning (count number of vets/ game)                      .      - Add veteran mechanic to units (unit counts its kills)
     B) Zone of control management (look at rendered games)             .      - Add ZoC to restrict movement, also add defenders
     C) Role of superunit? (count number of superunits per game)        .      - Add superunit creation (only unit not purchasable with currency)
     D) Big units for big impact? (count number of unit type)           .      - Specifically, add knights and catapults, why not also add archers at this point
     E) Healing units in own borders? (heals in/ heals out)             .      - Add healing mechanic
                                                                        .
                                                                        .
    Advanced exploring techniques:                                      .
                                                                        .
    A) Rider leapfrogging (look at rendered games)                      .      - Nothing to add here (couldve already been learned in the basegame)
    B) Dash dancing       (look at rendered games)                      .      - Nothing to add here (couldve already been learned in the basegame)
    C) Using roads (number of roads built per game)                     .      - Add road mechanic and where roads can be built. This will also need
                                                                        .        its own decision head I suppose...
    D) Explorer shaping (look at rendered games)                        .      - Add explorer dynamics based on gully video
    E) Efficient exploring in general (avg. uncovered tiles per turn)   .      - Nothing to add here WRONG: Add positional encoding 0.0 to 1.0 to 0.0
                                                                        .
                                                                        .
                                                                        .
                                                                        .


The first step is to think about how the new node dimensions should be ordered. I think that one hot encoding still will be the way to go over having a toggle dimension between players, because the network can learn it much easier. 
Also, in order to add features easier later, it should actually give a Enum class that saves out the dimensions for each "thing" in order to have the rest of the codebase program it dynamically, instead of hardcoding the dimensions into the classes. This also means finding a way for the hard-coded action masks... (maybe another Enum?)


Additionally, it must be easier to add features of the game and apply them to the tiles/ objects that they need to be applied to. LOOKING AT YOU city.unit AND tile.city AND tile.unit AND city.tile

To change this, I would really really really really really really really really really really like AI to do this, so I need a way to read the entire codebase into
a coding agent and have the agent do the cumbersome changes for me. 

All of this will be a fucking giant mega task spanning months potentially, so I need a way to version control.

Specifically, I would also like the base version of the game to still have its codebase form preserved, so maybe its time to create a branch on git?

Then, we can also incrementally include features rather than all at once. For example, the first branch could include just one or two city upgrades and currency, the next one then adds more city upgrades and the super unit and the next one then adds roads and other advanced shit.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Lastly about the PPO training. I honestly think that it could be infeasible to ever learn the advanced version of the game on my machine (or any other means that are not supercomputing clusters). This is because the number of games simulated to learn that stuff is just absurdly high. 

There are some ways to improve training; Remember the staged training idea written down in the .txt file for the new architecture (its on the surface)? By 

CHANGING THE SOFTMAX TO THE GUMBEL DISTRIBUTION (or something along the lines of it)

... I can force the policy to choose with much more entropy in the decisions. Then, stage by stage, the enforced temperature can be lowered again to make the agents decision less biased. 

Then we can see how far this can reach.

Also remember to look into CFR, maybe they got some additional techniques that can help me with that.


###################

Finally, if nothing of that works (were talking potentially a year of trying here!), one could think about bringing large reasoning models into play.

Lets say, I have an agent that does decently well. He knows how to balance eco and army on a 12 year old kid level and also knows how to defend a city against some simple attacks. 
But lets also say, that he has no idea about long term strategy, the critics value does not really reflect on the potential of the state and is just not close to human level...
------> Then what needs to happen is to include LRMs into the process. This will SIGNIFICANTLY slow down everything and simulating 1000 decisions would empty my wallet and full training time. BUT maybe, I can find a way to have the evaluation of the board state by a LRM finetuned to this version of the game to influence the decisions of the agent. It would be like exchanging the MCTS with an expert opinion of a LRM. How to build the bridge, whether the LRM is even able to plan long term and if the agent listens to the LRM are questions to be adressed. But, it could be the only way...
        

------------------------------------------------------------------

Now, now, this is quite a lot to swallow. 

Lets move this up step by step. Here are the next things to do and how cool or uncool they are:

1. Very uncool: Prepare the entire codebase to be dynamically programmed to introduce new mechanics that will 
    a) change the node dimensions DONE (19.04.)
    b) introduce new units/ city levels to the game 
    c) introduce new mechanics to the game (roads) 
    d) introduce new observables to the game (income, score, ...)

    This also includes git management, adding new branches DONE (Version 2.0)


2. Very cool: Add the new mechanics (ZoC, income by city, city upgrades and explorer, new units, roads increase movement, ...)

3. Medium cool: Add new decision heads that will handle the new mechanics (city upgrade head line, road head line, upgrade to vet head, ...)
                Also prepare training in stages. Add new rewards. 

4. Very cool: Start training new policy. Train in stages, first high temperature, then lower.
    4.5 Medium cool: Add logging for all the interesting observations during training that are mentioned above


As you can see, the first part is very uncool. Therefore, seek help from claude and meanwhile have some training running to stay motivated!




Good luck with that kiddo, here is where the good separate from the decent. Dont give up! You can do it.
















16.03. 16:47 Uhr

unit.def_bonus was fixed, although there needs to be logic for units with no fortify...






??.03. ?? Uhr

Writing this from the future, because I have started training with a new paradigm; NO dense rewards. The goal is now to train the agent, which already knows the basic techniques of the game to be more goal oriented;
This is done by removing the dense rewards, which also makes the critic score the board position in regards of the big reward penalty for ending a turn; it only predicts the value up until the end of the turn. 
Instead, I want a critic that asserts the board position in terms of how likely it is that it will WIN. For this, I want to train it with no dense rewards.

This appears to be known as reward curriculum in RL (Schrittweise anpassung der rewards) and seeks to make training more efficient.

However, this also includes some important design choices; First, it is not so easy to simulate a lot of episodes with a winner. Therefore, the agents must be good enough to generate some winning trajectories from the first stage of the reward curriculum. Only then can you move to remove the dense rewards. 

Second, from the simulated episodes, there will only be very few winning trajectories (because we are in a self-play on-policy setting, when the agent impoves in winning, it simultaneously improves in not loosing. Therefore, the win/ tie ratio will be pretty stable. 
---> Later, we can soften this up, by having dynamic rewards based on the income the players has, how many units he has/ how many cities and points he has. Then, every trajectory can be used. 

As of right now, I discard all trajectories which have no winner, because they would just produce 0 gradients (because there are no rewards), RIGHT???(???)

In order to get meaningful trajectories out of this, one also has to increase the episoded length, so that the agent can win, even when not playing optimally yet.

Additionally, I only trained on the smallest map type (11x11), so that the chance of a win is higher, it will also be very interesting to see, if this can be transferred to a bigger map. 

Very interesting will be:

- Let the dense reward agent play against the no dense reward (kinda unfair, given that the second one is based on the first one, but still interesting to see, if this improves the agents win rate.
For this, I need an interface, where I can pick different policies for player 1 and player 2. This should be fairly easy. 


Finally, what should also be of importance at this stage of the game and training; How good are humans performing against the trained agent. 
This will be a bit more cumbersome, given that for this I need to implement a way to decide for the actions myself. Maybe this decision interface can be built from the action_mask, but I still need a way to visually translate the tile indices and more importantly, the unit ids into something a human can pick.
---> This will be a long prompting session and you should make sure to separate this from the RL and game codebases, so that they stay clean and consice.



Now back to the present:

23.03. 13:40 Uhr

Looking at the first trained agents with the reward curriculum and adding some interesting games to the visual_examples file.






29.03. 00:12 Uhr

I coded up a new GameManager in a jupyter notebook file that allows to have different policies play against each other. 
--> Im also adding some games to the visual examples file (or maybe make a second one, because they get quite big already)

With this, I will be able to collect data, how much the policies improve during training. For this, I can have the game manager simulate a bunch of games with two different policies as the players and collect valuable information, such as n_wins from each player, length of games, number of unit types, etc. 
There is a lot that can be collected, most likely from the info dicts from each action. 

Now, I need a vision on how to visualize these findings in order to identify, which stats I actually want to save out. We are still at the very base version of the game, so only combat and unit creation is easily observable. 

Are there ways to observe "tactics" as defined in the table above w.o. looking at the renderings? This would also be highly interesting.
For example: Exploring speed could be found by some kind of derivative of the size of uncovered_tiles in the player class. 






30.03. 00:56 Uhr

I have created now some plots for the collected data in the jupyter notebook file named "Run_different_policies_against_each_other.ipynb". 
It turns out that there is really a lot still to do in terms of training because the I have the best agent play against the worst and while the tendencies are as was expected, the win rate is still pretty low with 2/3 of all games drawing in time and the best agent actually looses sometimes against the worst (only 50 updated in with dense rewards).

This is surprising and I really hope that this is not a lesson about how data hungry a PPO is, because then it is pretty unlikely to be trainable on my laptop. I have approx simulated and trained on around 500*32 games in the dense setting and then only a couple of 100 more in the reward curriculum. This sums up to no more than 20k games as an upper limit, which could just be too low.
Potentially, a successfull training (see settlers of catan) from scratch requires more like 500k-5M games, which just is not really feasible for this laptop. I would need more computing power to get there in reasonable time...

What I have to do now is to read literature. Literature about trainig RL pipelines for complex games like chess or other stategy games and get a feeling for how many simulation and ppo runs are necessary to even approach novice level of play.
I could also think about renting some computational recources at some point, but for this, I want the best training setup figured out obviously. Another idea is to use my big brain and come up with another training method that speeds up training. 
This could be by including human data, if I somehow get it into the framework, or by leveraging LRMs, but this also costs money, so it is on par with buying comp recources.



TASK: Figure out the top 3 papers (you already have 2 to be honest; one is referenced in the catan blog, the other one is this large summary paper about RL for strategy games) about PPO of complex strategy games. Read them paying focus on how much training is required and about the hyperparameter choices. 

TASK2: There are some hyperparams chosen by claude.ai during creation of the ppo modules. CHECK THEM!!! Among them are the running mean and any ppo parameter choices. Make sure to cross-check them with the literature youre reading.


Have fun, remember, thats the point of this!




30.03. 13:56 Uhr

Made the plots a little bit better, but then hit my claude.ai usage limit apparently after having to restart the prompt 3 times, because the reasoning just froze. I expect high demand worldwide atm, so I have to just sit it out I guess...

I can read some of the papers in the meantime.


16:22 Uhr:

I just thought of a good idea to test the tactical mechanics, that can only be observed from rendered games; 
Build a set of puzzle examples, that seek to observe the tactical mechanics outlined in the table further above;

For example, DASH DANCING: Have a simple partial graph PRE-DEFINED set up, where there is a warrior in front of an enemy 5HP warrior and behind there is fog of war. You can then simply run 2-10 decisions quickly to find, whether the model does DASH DANCING or not. 
The very same can be done for RIDER LEAPFROGGING, VET ASSIGNING, ROAD MECHANICS etc. (ROAD MECHANICS could be a city that can be seiged with using riders& roads)
For maximum efficiency, these may be included into the training pipeline and tested every 10 updates or so. Maybe sample multiple times to, to get an average as opposed to one singular decision. 

TODO: Build these pre-defined game states. This can only be done, once the advanced version of the game stands, so this is a TODO for after this TODO...
Make these situations look like real-world game situations, and introduce robustness for example by randomizing the "leftover/ irrelevant" partial graph in some way...
















18.04. 01:09 Uhr:

Planning my reentry into the project. After a long break, it is time to move further. For this, I will watch a yt video on how to use claude code in a foldered codebase.

Something to keep in mind when starting to train the new game version; At the phd position they expect me to be an expert with all the derivatives
of PPO (GPPO, TRPO, etc.), so its probably a good idea to try all of them out and get a feeling how each behaves. 

Also, since I will be using RL on language models, maybe its a good idea to work further on the idea of including LLMs that analyze the boardstate into the project, maybe simultaneously with CFR...

Finally, although this hurts a bit, maybe its a good idea to implement the PPO algorithm for the updated version fully by myself w.o. GenAI.
I can use the old one as a template, which will be almost like cheating, bc. its the same, but build it up from the theory I know, so that I can see, where I have some understanding gaps.

Work step by step with constant progress and you will be successful!

Good luck!





19.04. 11:40 Uhr - The big OVERHAUL- Version 2.0


OLD:


0 1 2	3  4        5 6 7 8 9	0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5
1 0 0	0  1		0 0 0 0 0 	0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
		P1 P2		v P1--P2--	P1--------------P2-------------
field	player		city 		W-------R-------W-------R------
type	control		feats		i r e h i r e h i r e h i r e h
								Units


NEW:



0 1 2	3  4        5 6 7 8 9	0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 0 0	0  1		0 0 0 0 0 	0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
		P1 P2		v P1--P2--	P1----------P2-
field	player		city 		        W R W R
type	control		feats		i r e h
								Units


Reason 1: We need to reduce the dimension, when adding more and more units. Now, the agent sees a tile and combines: Oh, I have a can_hit unit here. Oh this unit is also a knight.

Reason 2: During each players turn, the opponent units can only be in state ready (or state "responsive" i guess)



TODO FILE FOR THE OVERHAUL: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Current To-Dos and open design choices

This file lays down some important design choices for the todos that should be existentialized.

## Game simulator refactorization

### Tile featurization

- Any game-features that get introduced can cause an increase in the dimensionality of the tile featurization. Use the enum.py file to have a central controller to define the starting and ending dimensions of all features of the tile objects. DONE
- Opt for one-hot-encoding for the featurizers. DONE

### City class

- A city (of either player) or a village is a feature of a tile, it does not move. Currently, they are instantiated as objects which can hold a tile reference, unit reference etc. This causes a lot of cross-referencing which is highly undesired. Find a new design of the city object that alleviates the need for endless cross-referencing. DONE

### Board.py

- Currently, NODE_FEAT_DIM is hardcoded here, which is a problem. Board just wraps the tiles that make up the board. DONE
- The movement_topology_graph must be prepared to give values to the edges between tiles to be used for the road mechanic. Standard value is 1. DONE

### Player.py

- In construct_partial_graph_2players function, the tile freature dimensions are hard-coded, which is a problem. Use the enum.py class to have this be dynamically coded to switch the correct dimensions. DONE

### Game.py

- The function calc_movement_target_and_shortest_path also hard-codes a lot, which is a problem. The dimension values for checking movement options should also be controlled from the enums.py file. DONE
- Improve the calc_movement_target_and_shortest_path for new features to come, such as enemy zone of control, better way to remove target nodes and not path nodes. DONE
- advance_unit_turn_state function needs to be a bit more structured. This is very game specific and should be done by a human programmer.


## Environment wrapper

### unit identifier

- Currently, there is a design error with identifying opponent units eligible for attacking; In get_action_mask, the length of the list of opponent units is shown to the agent although he should only get information of the enemy units revealed to the player via its partial graph. Also, for human play, the unit needs to have an identifier other than being at a specific position in the list of units_under_control. This calls for the necessity of a light-weight id for units to make sure that the mask does not give away hidden information. This will also change a lot of the unit vs unit interaction code as it is currently written. DONE

### Moving the renderer to its own python file

- Currently the render function is build into the EnvWrapper, but it is probably better to isolate it into its own module. 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------






Now, we continue with manual changes to add new features:

1. New city upgrades, stars per turn and costs of everything

New city enums:

class CityType(IntEnum):
    village = 0
    lvl1 = 1
    lvl2_workshop = 2
    lvl2_explorer = 3
    lvl3_resources = 4
    lvl3_wall = 5
    lvl4_popgrwth = 6
    lvl4_bordergwth = 7
    lvl5_su = 8
    lvl5_park = 9
    lvl6_su = 10
    lvl6_park = 11
    lvl7_su = 12
    lvl7_park = 13
    lvl8plus = 14


New city featurization:

It needs to keep track of the choices, therefore we simply do:

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 
0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0      = city lvl5 with explorer, resources,  bordergrwth and superunit

0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 1      = city lvl8plus with 1 park and 2 superunits chosen (keep this for global board, conceal for partial graph)

v c w e w r b p s p s p s p p
i i o x a e o o u a         l
l t r p l s r p p r         u 
l y k l l o d u e k         s
a   s o   u e l r 
g   h r   r r a u
e   o e   c   t n
    p r   e   i i
          s   o t
              n



20.04. 00:07 Uhr:

-----------------TODO FILE FOR NEW FEATURES--------------------------------------------------

# Current To-Dos and open design choices

This file lays down some important design choices for the todos that should be existentialized.

## Game simulator overhaul and additions

### Player partial graph

- The switching of the dimensions of the partial graph generation in the player class is still hard-coded as opposed to being controlled by the slices from the enums.py file DONE
- Which dimensions to switch is a tricky question and should be human-controlled. Therefore, it would be very interesting to control which dimensions are getting swapped for player 2. DONE

### Road mechanic

- Roads can be placed on a visible tile by any player. It will therefore be included in the tile featurization. DONE
- If two adjacent tiles (also diagonal) both have roads, the edge weight between them gets updated to 0.5 
- Villages and a players city count as a road tile DONE
- a players units cannot use roads that lie withing enemy territory (player cntrl) 
- Placing a road costs 4 stars

### Inclusion of stars and stars per turn

- Creating units and upgrading cities costs stars DONE
- Owning cities grants stars per turn, which will be awarded to the player at the start of its turn. DONE
 
### Inclusion of score

 - Score is awarded for cities under control, units under control and controlled tiles. 
 - This score is visible to every player in the game.
 
### Addition of multiple new units 
 
 - New units were added and need their logic implemented: Knight, Archer, Catapult, Giant, Sword, DONE
 - Knights need additional turn_state mechanic: When they kill a unit, they can attack again; this continues until either no unit is in range, or the knight attacked and didnt kill. Use the message argument to identify if the knight made a kill. DONE
 - A giant can never be created in a city other than via the city upgrade mechanic. 

### Upgrade to veteran unit mechanic

- Each unit counts the number of enemy unit it killed. DONE
- When 3 kills are reached, the unit can upgrade to veteran status at any time during the players turn. DONE
- upgrading to veteran increases the total hp and current hp (it fully heals the unit) to the original hp + 5 DONE

### Healing mechanic

 - Healing units heals 2.0 hp outside of their own territory and 4.0 hp inside their own territory DONE
 - After having healed a unit, it becomes idle DONE
 - A unit can only be healed when in the ready state DONE

### Upgrade City

 - A city may be upgraded anytime during the players turn, if enough stars are available. DONE
 - The player can always choose between 0 and 1 (two choices) for the city upgrade with different effects. DONE
 - Workshop vs Explorer; A workshop means one more stars per turn for the city, an explorer is a special unit that is created on upgrade and moves 14 moves in random directions, irregardless of enemy zoc, occupied tiles, only by water
 - Wall vs resources; A wall increases the defense bonus, choosing resources will reward 5 stars back to the player after upgrade DONE
 - Popgrwth vs bordergrwth; Choosing popgrwth will reduce the cost of the next city upgrade by 6 stars, choosing bordergrwth instead increases the number of player controlled tiles around the city to a radius of 2 tiles around the city DONE
 - after this, the player can choose between a park, or a super_unit (su for short); the park functions exactly like a workshop and choosing su, will invoke CreatUnit and create a Giant on the city (also takes up one space of the city).


## Environment wrapper

### Moving the renderer to its own python file

- Currently the render function is build into the EnvWrapper, but it is probably better to isolate it into its own module. 

### action mask generation

- Added the new action types to the action mask (HealUnit, UpgradeCity, PlaceRoad, Upgrade2Veteran) DONE
- Need to include the stars cost to every possible action to zero out actions that are too expensive DONE



------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------















